# World-Order
Assignment 3- EU Barometer Public Opinion Trust in NATO Winter 2021-2023

Before 2021, NATO was seen by some as a dying alliance – a relic of an era of American bipolarity and hegemony. But after Putin’s invasion, Europe’s mostly stable order is threatened. Chancellor Olaf Scholz called it a “Zeitenwende”, but this has not just been for Germany, but rather for all of Europe. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine should lead directly to a change in threat perceptions experienced by EU member states and thus a change in perceptions of NATO’s security alliance. In 2022, NATO published a report saying that “(73 per cent) consider NATO important to the future security of their country...” Like this data from NATO, there are many overall public opinion polls towards NATO – but very few have dug deep into a country and regional level of analysis.  

To determine from an EU perspective public opinion on NATO both before and after the Russian invasion, I chose publicly available data from the yearly standard Eurobarometer poll. This figure shows a comparative European regional and country level analysis on public opinion percentages in 2021, 2022, and 2023 for the question: How much trust do you have in NATO? See Appendix A for figure.  

From Winter 2021 to 2022, most European states’ trust in NATO declined. In some instances (like in the Baltic, Nordic, and Western states) the decline was so drastic to decrease by 15 to 20 points. This shows in the lead up to the Russian invasion, public trust in NATO was rapidly declining. However, after the invasion (February 2022), this decline either plateaued or increased again for most states. In the West, public trust bounced back to 2021 levels for most.

The Eastern flank of NATO should, theoretically, have the highest threat perception from the Russian invasion. Poland has emerged since the invasion as a staunch proponent of NATO and follows in this data a diverging trend from its central and eastern European neighbors. Interestingly, Baltic support in Latvia and Lithuania have increased to almost pre-invasion levels, yet Estonia’s trust has drastically decreased by 20 points. Approval ratings in Finland and Sweden (both new or soon-to-be NATO states), have also drastically increased trust in NATO since the war. For the Eastern and Central states, trust in NATO seems lower and potentially even declining in comparison to the Western, Nordic, and Baltic states. This is an important finding, as Western NATO states must seek to reassure credibility among NATO for the more threatened Eastern allies.   

